2.Linear Regression

#What is Linear Regression?
“Linear regression predicts the relationship between two variables by assuming a linear connection between the independent and dependent variables. It seeks the optimal line that minimizes the sum of squared differences between predicted and actual values. Applied in various domains like economics and finance, this method analyzes and forecasts data trends. It can extend to multiple linear regression involving several independent variables and logistic regression, suitable for binary classification problems

#Simple Linear Regression
In a simple linear regression, there is one independent variable and one dependent variable. The model estimates the slope and intercept of the line of best fit, which represents the relationship between the variables. The slope represents the change in the dependent variable for each unit change in the independent variable, while the intercept represents the predicted value of the dependent variable when the independent variable is zero.

Linear regression is a quiet and the simplest statistical regression method used for predictive analysis in machine learning. Linear regression shows the linear relationship between the independent(predictor) variable i.e. X-axis and the dependent(output) variable i.e. Y-axis, called linear regression. If there is a single input variable X(independent variable), such linear regression is simple linear regression.


#####. Simple Regression Calculation
To calculate best-fit line linear regression uses a traditional slope-intercept form which is given below,

Yi = β0 + β1Xi 

where Yi = Dependent variable,  β0 = constant/Intercept, β1 = Slope/Intercept, Xi = Independent variable.

This algorithm explains the linear relationship between the dependent(output) variable y and the independent(predictor) variable X using a straight line  Y= B0 + B1 X.

Simple Linear Regression explanation
But how the linear regression finds out which is the best fit line?

The goal of the linear regression algorithm is to get the best values for B0 and B1 to find the best fit line. The best fit line is a line that has the least error which means the error between predicted values and actual values should be minimum.

####Why linear regression is important?
Linear regression is important for a few reasons:

Simplicity and interpretability: It’s a relatively easy concept to understand and apply. The resulting model is a straightforward equation that shows how one variable affects another. This makes it easier to explain and trust the results compared to more complex models.
Prediction: Linear regression allows you to predict future values based on existing data. For instance, you can use it to predict sales based on marketing spend or house prices based on square footage.

###Coefficient of Determination or R-Squared (R2)
R-Squared is a number that explains the amount of variation that is explained/captured by the developed model. It always ranges between 0 & 1 . Overall, the higher the value of R-squared, the better the model fits the data.


